Welcome to Cariboo Signals, an AI-generated review of the latest tech news and ideas that impact our rural communities. It's Wednesday, July 1st, 2026. Reaching you from the heart of the Cariboo, the homeland of the Secwépemc, Tŝilhqot'in, and Dakelh nations. Today's theme is Repair Culture and Practical Tech — I'm Riley.
And I'm Casey. Today we're looking at what it actually means to build things that last — gear, knowledge, and systems worth keeping.
Out at Horsefly Lake this morning it's 10 degrees, partly cloudy, high of 19. Across the region — 100 Mile House sitting at 8 with overcast, Williams Lake and Quesnel both at 11, and today's Chilcotin plateau spot, Hanceville, at 10 with mainly clear skies. Light drizzle expected tomorrow with a couple millimetres of precip — good day to get the outdoor projects done today.
Canada Day. Happy 158th.
Let's get into the news.
Starting with something genuinely on-theme today. At Hackaday Europe 2026, a presenter walked through building a retro PC completely from scratch — not hunting down vintage parts on eBay or at swap meets, but actually fabricating the components. The talk raises a real design question: when you can't source original parts anymore, can you recreate them from documentation? For retrocomputing hobbyists, that's already happening. For the rest of us thinking about rural self-sufficiency, that's a meaningful precedent.
The documentation piece is everything — you can only rebuild from scratch if someone wrote it down.
The Meshtastic mesh-radio project just dropped version 2.8, and it adds something worth noting for backcountry users: GPX track export. You can now log your movement through the app and pull that route out as a standard file that opens in any mapping tool. Meshtastic runs on inexpensive LoRa radios — devices that work without cell service or internet — so you're getting off-grid GPS tracking and peer-to-peer communication in a package that costs well under a hundred dollars and that you can repair yourself.
That's the kind of hardware that actually belongs in a Cariboo glove box.
NASA astronauts did a spacewalk to repair the International Space Station's robotic arm. The arm had a fault that needed hands-on intervention — two crew members working outside the station in full EVA suits. Even at the most sophisticated end of human engineering, there's no substitute for someone physically showing up with the right tools.
The most expensive repair call in history — makes a local diesel mechanic look like a bargain.
The Godox Lumen is a twenty-nine-dollar camera that doubles as a light meter — aimed at film photographers who want a dedicated meter without paying hundreds for a standalone instrument. Niche product, but the price point matters. When diagnostic tools get cheap enough, people actually use them. A light meter tells you whether the exposure is right before you commit film to it — and that framing holds for a lot of practical tools: cheap enough to own, useful enough to keep.
iFixit should take notes on that pricing philosophy.
B.C. Nurses' Union has filed a 72-hour strike notice with the labour relations board. That's significant for rural communities across the province, including ours — Williams Lake and Quesnel both have hospital services that run on nursing staff. A work stoppage would hit rural healthcare harder than urban centres, because there's less redundancy.
The 'no backup system' problem shows up everywhere out here.
Sweden has granted a 25-year rare earths mining concession to Leading Edge Materials — one of Europe's more significant heavy rare earths deposits. The strategic relevance: rare earths go into the motors, batteries, and electronics that repair culture depends on. If Europe is moving to secure its own supply chain for those materials, it changes who controls the components that make modern repair possible in the first place.
And the Cariboo has critical minerals of its own — that conversation isn't academic for us.
The Engadget review roundup this week includes the MSI Claw 8 handheld gaming PC, the Sony A7R V, and Ray-Ban Meta smart glasses. Worth flagging because repairability is genuinely diverging across these product categories. Handheld gaming PCs tend to be more user-serviceable than flagship phones. The Sony camera line has historically had reasonable repair support. The Ray-Ban Meta glasses — different story. When the compute is in the frame and the frame is glued shut, repair is theoretical.
Glued shut is the two-word obituary for repairability.
Bill Gates made news this week with a comment that's been circulating: if a robot does the same job a worker does, you'd think we'd tax the robot. He's framing it as a way to slow the automation build-out enough to let policy catch up. Not a new idea — economists have debated robot taxes for years — but Gates carrying the message shifts the conversation.
Slowing deployment doesn't solve displacement, though — it just gives you more time to not solve it.
And filmmaker Carl Rinsch was sentenced to two and a half years for defrauding Netflix out of eleven million dollars for a sci-fi series he never finished. The court heard supporters including Keanu Reeves asked for leniency, but the sentence stood. Somewhere, a development executive is updating their due diligence checklist.
That might be the most repair-adjacent story of the day — fixing a broken production oversight system from the inside.
The nurses' strike situation and the Meshtastic update both connect to where we're heading in today's Deep Dive. But first —
School District 27 serves students across Williams Lake, 100 Mile House, and the surrounding Cariboo-Chilcotin — a huge geographic footprint with a wide range of community needs. They've been working on rural education programs that take the region's realities seriously: distance, small schools, and the importance of practical skills alongside academics. If you're a parent, a community member, or someone who cares about what the next generation learns about taking care of things — including the tools and systems around them — SD27 is worth knowing about. Their website is sd27.bc.ca.
Rural schools that integrate hands-on learning are doing something universities are still trying to figure out.
That connects directly to where we're going next — whether practical tech knowledge can be designed to outlast the conditions that created it. Give us a minute.
The question worth anchoring on today is a design question, not just a policy question. The regulatory side of right-to-repair gets plenty of attention — legislation, manufacturer pushback, all of it. What gets less attention is whether technology itself can be designed so that repair knowledge is inherently portable and structurally persistent. Not dependent on finding the right person, not dependent on a grant cycle, not dependent on a program that sunsets in three years.
The Meshtastic story from the roundup is a solid entry point. What makes Meshtastic interesting isn't just the off-grid communication angle. The entire project is open-source, the hardware schematics are public, and version 2.8's GPX export means your data isn't locked inside a proprietary app. That's a design philosophy, not just a feature set.
And it has a specific Cariboo application. Backcountry users — ranchers checking fencelines, hunters, search-and-rescue volunteers — operate in areas with no cell coverage. A Meshtastic node runs on a TTGO or similar ESP32 board. You can buy the components for under fifty dollars. You can flash the firmware yourself. If a node fails, you replace the board, not a subscription.
The skill floor doesn't disappear just because the hardware is cheap. Flashing firmware requires knowing what firmware is. Sourcing an ESP32 in Horsefly is not the same as sourcing one in Vancouver.
Shipping exists.
Shipping takes a week, and you might need the node tomorrow. The Cariboo isn't just geographically remote — it's logistically remote in a way that compounds every repair timeline. When the nearest electronics supplier is three hours away, the buffer between 'it works' and 'we're waiting on parts' is razor thin.
Which is exactly why the design philosophy matters more here than anywhere else. Communities that can't run to a store need gear that's designed to be understood, maintained, and improvised around. The Meshtastic codebase has an active community — people who've documented repairs, workarounds, edge cases. That documentation is a form of infrastructure.
Documentation that assumes internet access to retrieve it. Real circularity problem for off-grid applications.
Though Meshtastic 2.8's offline mapping improvements are addressing that. The GPX export isn't just about sharing routes — it's about keeping data usable without a cloud service. Portable formats, open standards, local-first operation. That's the pattern.
The retrocomputing story from Hackaday lands here too. Building a retro PC from scratch rather than hunting vintage parts — that project is essentially an argument that if you have complete enough documentation, you can recreate the thing. Which is a much more radical claim than 'you can repair it.' Fabrication from docs is a different capability level than swapping a capacitor.
Different capability level, but it maps to something real in rural communities. Rural mechanics have been doing functional equivalents of this for decades. You can't get the OEM part, so you machine it. You fabricate a bracket. You adapt a gasket from a different engine family because the geometry is close enough. That's not makeshift — that's applied engineering. The retrocomputing community is rediscovering something rural workshops never stopped doing.
The rural mechanic has forty years of embodied knowledge about what 'close enough' means in metal. The person flashing a Meshtastic node does not have forty years of embodied knowledge about RF propagation and antenna matching. The skill isn't transferable by analogy.
The skill isn't identical, but the structure of skill transfer is analogous. The question is whether we're building the equivalent of apprenticeship for modern practical electronics. And some communities are. There are makerspaces in comparable rural regions running electronics repair workshops alongside more traditional metalworking and woodworking programs.
Name one that's survived more than five years without a university or government anchor.
The Repair Café model originating in the Netherlands has chapters that have run on volunteer models for over a decade. Some rural chapters in Europe have done the same. The model isn't self-evidently fragile — it depends on whether the founding cohort builds succession into the structure from the start.
Which is the succession problem at the heart of all of this. The Cariboo has lost institutional repair knowledge — not because people stopped caring, but because there was no formal handoff mechanism. An informal volunteer network is one retirement or one move away from collapse.
And that's where design matters most. A Repair Café that keeps its knowledge in people's heads is fragile. A Repair Café that systematically documents repairs — photos, schematics, failure modes, workarounds — is building something that outlasts the individual. The documentation is the succession plan.
Documentation requires discipline and time. Volunteers don't always have either. The people who are good at fixing things are often not the people who are good at writing down how they fixed things. That's a real tension — not one you solve through better program design.
You solve it through tool choice. Cheap action cameras and automatic transcription mean that 'document the repair' can be as simple as pointing a phone at the workbench and talking through what you're doing. A fifteen-minute repair video on a local server is more useful to the next person than a written manual that nobody made. The barrier to documentation has dropped dramatically.
Local server. Who maintains the server?
A community that's already maintaining a Meshtastic network has the technical capacity to maintain a local media server. These aren't separate projects — they're the same human infrastructure.
Or they're two competing demands on the same three people who know how any of this works. You're describing a volunteer base that's already stretched, and then adding another system they're responsible for.
That's the actual constraint, and I don't want to paper over it. In a community of a few hundred people, the technical capacity pool is genuinely thin. But that's an argument for designing systems that require less ongoing maintenance — not for abandoning the infrastructure. A Raspberry Pi running a local media server doesn't need daily attention. It needs someone to set it up once and someone to restart it when it crashes.
And when the Raspberry Pi itself fails? And the person who set it up moved to Kamloops?
Then you restore from backup. Which is documented in the video on the server. Which — okay, I hear the bootstrapping problem.
There it is. The system for preserving knowledge requires the knowledge it's supposed to preserve. That's a genuine philosophical knot, not just a logistics issue.
But communities have solved bootstrapping problems before. Some First Nations communities in the Cariboo have been building digital capacity in ways designed to be community-maintained, not consultant-dependent. That's the model worth studying: not 'we hired someone to set this up,' but 'we built the capacity to own it ourselves.' The distinction matters enormously for longevity.
The model is worth pointing to. The question is whether the capability transfer actually happened or whether there's still a technical dependency that's just less visible. Genuine capability transfer — where the community can actually diagnose and repair the system without calling anyone — is rarer than programs claim.
But when it works, it's structurally different from a service contract. And that's the exact same argument as the difference between repair culture and replacement culture. You either understand what you're running, or you're dependent on the person who does. In a rural community, that dependency question isn't abstract — it's the question of whether your communication infrastructure survives a single staffing change.
The NASA spacewalk story is interesting in that context. The most heavily resourced repair operation on earth — two astronauts, years of training, the full engineering support of Mission Control — and the answer to a robotic arm fault is still: someone has to physically go out there, understand what's wrong, and fix it with their hands. No amount of remote diagnostics replaced that.
Which is both an argument for hands-on skill always mattering and evidence that even NASA can't fully automate away the need for a person who understands the system deeply enough to improvise.
Both. And it maps to the question of whether AI tools can carry repair knowledge forward. If you have a large language model that can walk you through a repair procedure, is that a substitute for understanding the underlying system — or is it a scaffold that works until the scaffold fails?
It's a scaffold. But scaffolds have real value when you know they're scaffolds. The danger is when communities treat AI-assisted repair guidance as a replacement for building local expertise, rather than as a bridge to it. Use the scaffold while you're building the wall — but build the wall.
Except the incentive structure cuts the other way. If the AI walkthrough gets the immediate repair done, what motivates anyone to develop deeper understanding? The scaffold becomes comfortable. That's not a hypothetical — it's the story of every technology that was supposed to augment human skill and ended up replacing the motivation to acquire it. GPS and map-reading. Spell-check and spelling. The convenience trap is real.
The convenience trap is real for individuals. But communities that depend on the scaffold for critical infrastructure — communication, water systems, power — find out fast when the scaffold fails. Rural communities have a built-in incentive to go deeper because the consequences of not going deeper arrive faster and hit harder. In Vancouver, your internet goes down and you wait for a tech. In Horsefly, your repeater goes down and your emergency communication goes with it.
So the argument is that rural stakes create rural motivation. That tracks — until it doesn't. Because the same people facing those stakes are the ones with the least free time to develop the expertise. The rancher whose Meshtastic node keeps the SAR team connected is also running cattle, fixing fencing, and serving on two community boards. Urgency doesn't create hours in the day.
No, but it does clarify priorities. And it connects to the SD27 thread. If School District 27 is integrating hands-on practical tech into its programs — electronics, fabrication, repair alongside traditional trades — then the capacity pool for the next generation looks structurally different. The school system is one of the few institutions in the Cariboo with genuine reach into every community and genuine continuity across decades.
The question is whether 'practical tech' in schools means soldering irons and Raspberry Pis, or whether it means typing and Google Slides. Those are very different interventions.
It means whatever the teachers and the community push for it to mean. Which is exactly why the feedback loop from community to school matters. If ranchers and SAR volunteers and small business owners are telling SD27 what skills are actually scarce, the curriculum can respond. That feedback loop exists — it's not always activated.
Then activate it. If you're in the Cariboo and you have a view on what practical tech skills are missing in your community — what your neighbours can't do that they need to be able to do — that's a conversation worth having at the school board level. Not a grant proposal. A conversation.
And if you're a retired mechanic, an electrician, a ham radio operator — anyone who carries knowledge that the next generation doesn't have — the most valuable thing you can do right now is find one person to teach it to and document how you did it. Point a phone at the workbench. Talk through the steps. Put the video somewhere someone else can find it. That's the repair culture we're actually talking about. Not programs. People choosing to pass it along.
I'm still not sure the documentation fixes the bootstrapping problem we identified. But the person-to-person teaching — that works whether the server crashes or not. If something in today's episode connects to what you're already doing, or what you wish existed in your corner of the Cariboo, we'd like to hear about it — feedback at cariboosignals dot c-a.
Thanks for spending part of your Canada Day with us. Enjoy the rest of it.
Take care of your stuff. And take care of each other.